The Bohr family is a Danish family of scientists, scholars and amateur sportsmen. The most famous members are Niels Bohr, physicist and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922, Aage Bohr, son of Niels, also a physicist and in 1975 also received the Nobel Prize, Harald Bohr, mathematician and brother of Niels, etc.
Christian Bohr, a physiologist and professor of physiology, was born to Henrik Georg Christian Bohr. Christian Bohr married Ellen Adler Bohr, the daughter of David Baruch Adler. They had 3 children:

Niels Bohr, a physicist and winner of Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922. Niels married Margrethe Nørlund Bohr, an editor and transcriber, and sister to Niels Erik Nørlund, a mathematician. Neils had 6 children, all sons. The oldest, Christian Bohr, died in a boating accident in 1934, and another, Harald, was severely mentally disabled, died at the age of about 10/11. Remaining four sons were:Aage Bohr became an illustrious physicist like his father and was awarded Nobel Prize in Physics in 1975.
Vilhem Bohr, Aage's son, is a physiologist affiliated to University of Copenhagen and the National Institute on Aging.
Eliot Bohr, a PhD fellow at Niels Bohr Institute, is an experimental physicist working in the field of atomic, molecular, and optical physics.
Tomas Bohr is also a physicist and professor of Biophysics at the Technical University of Denmark.
Hans Bohr, a physician and professor.
Henrik Bohr is a senior researcher at Technical University of Denmark.
Erik Bohr, an engineer.
Ernest Bohr, a lawyer and field hockey player who participated in the 1948 Olympics in London.
Harald Bohr, a mathematician and footballer. He played for Denmark at Olympics 1908, winning the silver medal. Herald married Ulla Bohr (nee Borregaard).
Ole Bohr (1922-2022). Ole married Jonna Bohr (nee Siesby).
Ellen Følner (nee Bohr)
Jennifer "Jenny" Bohr

Involvement in Sports
Niels and Harald played as footballers, and the two brothers played a number of amateur matches for the Copenhagen-based Akademisk Boldklub, with Niels in goal and Harald in defence. There is, however, no truth in the oft-repeated claim that Niels emulated Harald by playing for the DenmRK national team. Ernest Bohr  was a 1948 Olympic field hockey player.

References
External links
Niels Bohr Family Correspondence, 18XX-1962.
Niels Bohr Archive