Haoreima (Meitei: ꯍꯥꯎꯔꯩꯃ) or Haoleima (Old Manipuri: ꯍꯥꯎꯂꯩꯃ) (literally, "tribal lady") is a goddess of tragic love and separation in Meitei mythology and religion of Ancient Kangleipak (Ancient Manipur). According to some legends, she was a woman from the hills, who was killed while arranging to meet her lover, and turned into a tortured spirit. She is regarded as an incarnation of Goddess Panthoibi. She is also identified with goddess Nongthang Leima.She is also worshipped as goddess Ireima. She is one of the most revered Meitei goddesses, though she is of Tangkhul origin.

Etymology
In Meitei language (Manipuri language), the name "Haoreima" is derived from "Haoleima". "Haoleima" is made up of two component words, "Hao" and "Leima". In Meitei language (Manipuri language), "Hao" has multiple meanings. It may mean (1) yes (the response), (2) tasty, savoury or (3) tribe. Here, "Hao" means a "tribe". In Meitei language (Manipuri language), "Leima" means a queen or a mistress or a lady.The name "Haoreima" usually refers to a tribal woman carrying a traditional elongated basket ("sam" or "sham").

Legend of deification
According to a legend, she was the daughter of Khelemba, a Tangkhul chief of Chingdai village. She was already married to "Khamlangba", a Tangkhul chief of Chingshong village. However, despite marrying Khamlangba, she had a secret love affair with Meitei king Meidingu Tabungba, also known as Tabung Saphaba (1359-1394). Upon discovering the secret relationship, Khamlangba, getting angry, beheaded Tabung Saphaba. Traumatized at the event, Haoreima took away the head of her lover to the Kanglei Pungmayol. Later, she also followed her lover's path and turned into Meitei goddess of tragic love and separation.
She is also identified as goddess Ireima, who's also an incarnation of goddess Panthoibi.

Namesakes
There are many people with the name "Haoreima" in the history of Ancient Kangleipak (Ancient Manipur).
Haoreima Tamheibee was the daughter of King Atom Nongyai Thingkol Hanba of the Khuman dynasty. She was married to Meitei King Kainou Irengba (984 AD-1074 AD). After the marriage, she came to be known as "Meitei Leima" (lit. Meitei Queen).

See also
Panthoibi
Nongthang Leima

Notes
References
External links

Ibemhal, Thounaojam Chanu (2000). Haoreima Shambubi.