This is an alphabetical list of plants used in herbalism.
Phytochemicals possibly involved in biological functions are the basis of herbalism, and may be grouped as: 

primary metabolites, such as carbohydrates and fats found in all plants
secondary metabolites serving a more specific function.For example, some secondary metabolites are toxins used to deter predation, and others are pheromones used to attract insects for pollination. Secondary metabolites and pigments may have therapeutic actions in humans, and can be refined to produce drugs; examples are quinine from the cinchona, morphine and codeine from the poppy, and digoxin from the foxglove.In Europe, apothecaries stocked herbal ingredients as traditional medicines. In the Latin names for plants created by Linnaeus, the word officinalis indicates that a plant was used in this way. For example, the marsh mallow has the classification Althaea officinalis, as it was traditionally used as an emollient to soothe ulcers. Pharmacognosy is the study of plant sources of phytochemicals.
Some modern prescription drugs are based on plant extracts rather than whole plants. The phytochemicals may be synthesized, compounded or otherwise transformed to make pharmaceuticals. Examples of such derivatives include aspirin, which is chemically related to the salicylic acid found in white willow. The opium poppy is a major industrial source of opiates, including morphine. Few traditional remedies, however, have translated into modern drugs, although there is continuing research into the efficacy and possible adaptation of traditional herbal treatments.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Databases
Manhã EM, Silva MC, Alves MG, Almeida MB, Brandão MG (October 3, 2008). "PLANT - A bibliographic database about medicinal plants". Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia. 18 (4): 614–617. doi:10.1590/S0102-695X2008000400020.
Duke J. "Dr. Duke's Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases". Retrieved 2011-09-29.
"Protabase: Useful Plants of Tropical Africa". Plant Resources of Tropical Africa. Archived from the original on 2011-12-16. Retrieved 2011-09-29. {{cite web}}: External link in |publisher= (help)
"Tropical Plant Database". Raintree. Retrieved 2011-10-18.
"Plant Database". Plants for a Future. Retrieved 2011-10-18.
"Vitamins & Supplements Center". WebMD. Retrieved 2021-10-01.

See also
Notes
^ Digitalis use in the United States is controlled by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and can only be prescribed by a physician. Misuse can cause death.
This encyclopedia is not a substitute for medical advice nor a complete description of these herbs, their dangers (up to and including death), and their (in)compatibility with alcohol or other drugs.

References
Further reading
External links
 The dictionary definition of herbalism at Wiktionary
 Media related to Herbalism at Wikimedia Commons