Wellmania is an Australian comedy-drama streaming television series co-created by Brigid Delaney and Benjamin Law for Netflix. Based on Delaney's memoir-reportage hybrid, Wellmania: Misadventures in the Search for Wellness, it follows Liv Healy (Celeste Barber), a 39-year-old woman who struggles with a "major health crisis" as she tries various methods to reclaim her well-being. The series launched globally on the streaming platform on 29 March 2023.

Premise
Liv Healy, a New York-based food writer with an unhealthy lifestyle, recently receives an opportunity that forces her to reevaluate her choices in her hometown of Sydney, Australia. Struggling with her previous habits, she tries various methods of healthy living in order to advance her career to varying levels of success.

Cast
Main
Celeste Barber as Olivia "Liv" Healy, New York Times food writer
Olive McKinnon plays a younger Liv Healy
JJ Fong as Amy Kwan,  an investigative journalist from The Standard Sydney who is Liv's best friend of 24 years
Heleina Zara plays a younger Amy Kwan
Genevieve Mooy as Lorraine Healy, Liv's mother who works as a nurse
Lachlan Buchanan as Gareth "Gaz" Healy, Liv's brother and fitness trainer
Remy Hii as Dalbert Tan, Gaz's fiancé
Alexander Hodge as Isaac Huang, ex-football player who is Liv's love interest
Simone Kessell as Helen King, editor-in-chief of The Standard Sydney
Virginie Laverdure as Valerie Jones, Liv's editor from New York Times
Johnny Carr as Doug Henderson, Amy's husband who is a construction worker

Recurring
Leah Vandenberg as Dr. Priyanka Singh, consulate-approved physician
Anthony Phelan as Dr. Price, Lorraine's employer and physician
Guy Edmonds as Chad, United States consulate official
Billy Bate as Archie Henderson-Kwan, Amy and Doug's son
Kiera McAlister as Evie Henderson-Kwan, Amy and Doug's teenage daughter
Claire Lovering as Bianga, Dalbert's close friend
Nicole Shostak as Megan, Dalbert's close friend
Matthew Backer as Armand, Dalbert's close friend and a hairstylist

Guest
Miranda Otto as Camille Lavigne, sex therapist and motivational speaker
Aden Young as Gabriel Wolf, renowned chef from New York
Yael Stone as Philomena, a death doula
Keegan Joyce as Sebastian, Gaz's ex-boyfriend

Episodes
Production
Development
Netflix had ordered Wellmania, inspired by Brigid Delaney's novel, Wellmania: Misadventures in the Search for Wellness, on 11 December 2021 for an eight-part half-hour series. Delaney and Benjamin Law was announced as co-creators, with Law serving as executive producer. Celeste Barber, Belinda King, Bree-Anne Sykes, in addition to Chris Oliver-Taylor and Warren Clarke from Fremantle, would also join Law as an executive producer. Additionally, Romina Accurso, Nick Coyle, and Amy Stewart were announced as series' writers. On 23 March 2022, Erin White and Helena Brooks were unveiled as the series directors. On 31 October 2023, Barber confirmed that the series had been canceled after one season.

Casting
Upon series announcement on 11 December 2021, Celeste Barber was also announced to play the series' lead. On 21 March 2022, it was revealed that JJ Fong, Genevieve Mooy, Lachlan Buchanan, Remy Hii, Alexander Hodge, Simone Kessell, Johnny Carr, and Virginie Laverdure would join Barber as the main casts of the series. Additionally, Miranda Otto, Leah Vandenberg, and Aden Young would also appear on undisclosed capacities.

Filming
Principal photography of the series were announced on 11 December 2021, with Sydney unveiled as one of the shooting locations. On 21 March 2022, Dan Freene was revealed as the series cinematographer.

Release
Wellmania premiered on the streaming platform on 29 March 2023.

Marketing
First trailer of the series was launched on YouTube on 15 February 2023.

Awards and nominations
Logie Award for Most Popular Actress – Celeste Barber (pending)

See also
List of Australian television series

References
External links
Wellmania on Netflix 
Wellmania at IMDb