Albert Einstein (1879–1955) was a renowned theoretical physicist of the 20th century, best known for his theories of special relativity and general relativity.  He also made important contributions to statistical mechanics, especially his treatment of Brownian motion, his resolution of the paradox of specific heats, and his connection of fluctuations and dissipation.  Despite his reservations about its interpretation, Einstein also made seminal contributions to quantum mechanics and, indirectly, quantum field theory, primarily through his theoretical studies of the photon.Einstein's scientific publications are listed below in four tables: journal articles, book chapters, books and authorized translations.   Each publication is indexed in the first column by its number in the Schilpp bibliography (Albert Einstein: Philosopher–Scientist, pp. 694–730) and by its article number in Einstein's Collected Papers.  Complete references for these two bibliographies may be found below in the Bibliography section.  The Schilpp numbers are used for cross-referencing in the Notes (the final column of each table), since they cover a greater time period of Einstein's life at present.  The English translations of titles are generally taken from the published volumes of the Collected Papers.  For some publications, however, such official translations are not available; unofficial translations are indicated with a § superscript. Although the tables are presented in chronological order by default, each table can be re-arranged in alphabetical order for any column by the reader clicking on the arrows at the top of that column.  For illustration, to re-order a table by subject—e.g., to group together articles that pertain to "General relativity" or "Specific heats"—one need only click on the arrows in the "Classification and Notes" columns.  To print out the re-sorted table, one may print it directly by using the web-browser Print option; the "Printable version" link at the left gives only the default sorting.  Collaborative works by Einstein are highlighted in lavender, with the co-authors provided in the final column of the table.
In addition to his scientific publications, the Schilpp bibliography notes over 130 of Einstein's non-scientific works, often on humanitarian or political topics (pp. 730–746). There were also five volumes of Einstein's Collected Papers (volumes 1, 5, 8–10) that are devoted to his correspondence, much of which is concerned with scientific questions, but were never prepared for publication.

Chronology and major themes
The following chronology of Einstein's scientific discoveries provides a context for the publications listed below, and clarifies the major themes running through his work. The first four entries come from his Annus Mirabilis papers or miracle year papers.

In 1905, Einstein proposed the existence of the photon, an elementary particle associated with electromagnetic radiation (light), which was the foundation of quantum theory.  In 1909, Einstein showed that the photon carries momentum as well as energy and that electromagnetic radiation must have both particle-like and wave-like properties if Planck's law holds; this was a forerunner of the principle of wave–particle duality. He would go on to receive the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for this work.
In 1905, Einstein developed a theory of Brownian motion in terms of fluctuations in the number of molecular collisions with an object, providing further evidence that matter was composed of atoms.  A few weeks earlier, he had derived the Einstein relation for diffusion, which was the first example of the general fluctuation-dissipation theorem and allowed a good estimate of the Avogadro constant.
In 1905, Einstein developed the theory of special relativity, which reconciled the relativity of motion with the observed constancy of the speed of light (a paradox of 19th-century physics).  Special relativity is now a core principle of physics.  Its counterintuitive predictions that moving clocks run more slowly, that moving objects are shortened in their direction of motion, and that the order of events is not absolute have been confirmed experimentally.
In 1905, Einstein developed his concept of Mass–energy equivalence. Its relation E=mc2 suggested that matter was a form of energy, which was later verified by the mass defect in atomic nuclei.  The energy released in nuclear reactions—which is essential for nuclear power and nuclear weapons—can be estimated from such mass defects.
In 1907 and again in 1911, Einstein developed the first quantum theory of specific heats by generalizing Planck's law.  His theory resolved a paradox of 19th-century physics that specific heats were often smaller than could be explained by any classical theory.  His work was also the first to show that Planck's quantum mechanical law E=hν was a fundamental law of physics, and not merely special to blackbody radiation.
Between 1907 and 1915, Einstein developed the theory of general relativity, a classical field theory of gravitation that provides the cornerstone for modern astrophysics and cosmology.  General relativity is based on the surprising idea that time and space dynamically interact with matter and energy, and has been checked experimentally in many ways, confirming its predictions of matter affecting the flow of time, frame dragging, black holes, and gravitational waves.In 1917, Einstein published the idea for the Einstein–Brillouin–Keller method for finding the quantum mechanical version of a classical system.  The famous Bohr model of the hydrogen atom is a simple example, but the EBK method also gives accurate predictions for more complicated systems, such as the dinuclear cations H2+ and HeH2+.
In 1918, Einstein developed a general theory of the process by which atoms emit and absorb electromagnetic radiation (his A and B coefficients), which is the basis of lasers (stimulated emission) and shaped the development of modern quantum electrodynamics, the best-validated physical theory at present.
In 1924, together with Satyendra Nath Bose, Einstein developed the theory of Bose–Einstein statistics and Bose–Einstein condensates, which form the basis for superfluidity, superconductivity, and other phenomena.
In 1935, together with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, Einstein put forward what is now known as the EPR paradox, and argued that the quantum-mechanical wave function must be an incomplete description of the physical world.
In the final thirty years of his life, Einstein explored whether various classical unified field theories could account for both electromagnetism and gravitation and, possibly, quantum mechanics.  However, his efforts were unsuccessful, since those theories did not match experimental observations.

Journal articles
Most of Einstein's original scientific work appeared as journal articles.  Articles on which Einstein collaborated with other scientists are highlighted in lavender, with the co-authors listed in the "Classification and notes" column. These are the total of 272 scientific articles.

Book chapters
With the exception of publication #288, the following book chapters were written by Einstein; he had no co-authors.  Given that most of the chapters are already in English, the English translations are not given their own columns, but are provided in parentheses after the original title; this helps the table to fit within the margins of the page. These are the total of 31.

Books
The following books were written by Einstein. With the exception of publication #278, he had no co-authors. These are the total of 16 books.

Authorized translations
The following translations of his work were authorized by Einstein.

See also
Albert Einstein Archives
Einstein Papers Project
History of special relativity
History of general relativity
History of the Big Bang theory
History of quantum mechanics
History of thermodynamics
Timeline of gravitational physics and relativity

Footnotes
References
The following references are drawn from Abraham Pais' biography of Albert Einstein, Subtle is the Lord; see the Bibliography for a complete reference.

Bibliography
External links
(in German) List of Scientific Publications of Albert Einstein from 1901–1922 Archived May 8, 2013, at the Wayback Machine from the Einstein website
Einstein Papers Project at the California Institute of Technology
Einstein Archives Online at Hebrew University
Einstein's publications on BibNetWiki