Non! is an extended play by Scottish rock band Big Country, which was released in the UK in 1995 as an action awareness record for Greenpeace. Non! reached No. 77 in the UK Singles Chart in December 1995.

Background
Non! was released as an action awareness record for Greenpeace in their campaign against France's nuclear testing at Moruroa. The EP was rush-released in November 1995 to "add energy to the movement and to try and raise much-needed funds". The band's late 1995 UK tour was also organised to benefit Greenpeace and raise awareness of the campaign.Three of the four songs on the single were taken from the band's seventh studio album Why the Long Face. Adamson revealed in a press release associated with the EP: "Of the tracks we had on Why the Long Face, "Post Nuclear Talking Blues" and "Blue On a Green Planet" seemed the most fitting. We have been on tour all summer so unfortunately the time wasn't available to record any new tracks."Non! peaked at No. 77 in the UK Singles Chart. The four-track EP's leading track "Post Nuclear Talking Blues" was issued as a one-track promotional single to generate radio play.The band's manager Ian Grant told the official Country Club fanzine in 1996: "No money was raised to speak of with regard to the EP but over £10,000 was raised on the tour, new members were recruited and a lot of publicity was generated."

Critical reception
Music Week noted there was "a more folky tilt to this anti-nuclear testing four-track EP". JT Griffith of AllMusic gave the EP three out of five stars and described "All Go Together" as the "standout track", with the EP's "political context giv[ing] the song a new depth and poignancy".

Track listing
CD EP"Post Nuclear Talking Blues" - 3:22
"Blue On a Green Planet" - 4:52
"God's Great Mistake" - 4:50
"All Go Together" (Acoustic) - 3:19CD single (promo)"Post Nuclear Talking Blues" - 3:22

Personnel
Big Country

Stuart Adamson – vocals, guitar
Bruce Watson – guitar
Tony Butler – bass, backing vocals
Mark Brzezicki – drums, percussion, backing vocalsProduction

Chris Sheldon – producer on all tracks except "All Go Together"
Big Country – producers (all tracks)Other

S.W.I.M. Multimedia – Chirac illustrations

Charts


== References ==