The Anthropocene Extinction is the sixth studio album by American death metal band Cattle Decapitation. It was released on August 7, 2015, on Metal Blade Records. It became Cattle Decapitation's first album to chart on the Billboard 200, debuting at No. 100 (No. 44 on "Top Albums").

Lyrical concept
The previous record, Monolith of Inhumanity, dealt with the future of Earth, if mankind keeps its current style of life. The Anthropocene Extinction deals with the results of mankind's influence on the environment, such as the Great Pacific garbage patch.

Critical reception
The album received widespread acclaim from music critics. At Metacritic (a review aggregator site which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 from music critics), based on four critics, the album has received a score of 86/100, which indicates "universal acclaim". Reviews particularly praised Travis Ryan's vocal performance, with Exclaim! writing that "Littered throughout the wasteland of gurgling growls and shrill shrieks that fill The Anthropocene Extinction are the snarls that the vocalist experimented with on 2012's Monolith of Inhumanity, a sort of pseudo-singing that just might be more unsettling than his more traditional death metal scream, and which showcases his impressive range."
About.com praised the variety and songwriting on the album, praising the band's attention to detail: "Cattle Decapitation write albums, a quality that allows each song to fit within the entire grand vision. An interlude like 'The Burden of Seven Billion' may seem like filler, but its placement allows a reprise from a first half of life-draining potency. A similar claim follows the gloomy 'Ave Exitium', which follows in the vein of 'The Harvest Floor' and 'The Monolith' as a haunting intro to a momentous closer in 'Pacific Grim'."

Track listing
Personnel
Credits are adapted from the album's liner notes.Cattle Decapitation

Travis Ryan – vocals, keyboards, drums on "Ave Exitium"
Josh Elmore – guitars
Dave McGraw – drums
Derek Engemann – bass, additional gang vocals on "The Prophets of Loss", keyboards and drums on "The Burden of Seven Billion"Guest musicians

Philip H. Anselmo – narration on "The Prophets of Loss"Additional musicians

Author & Punisher – intro of "Plagueborne"
Jürgen Bartsch (Bethlehem) – spoken word on "Pacific Grim"Production

Dave Otero – production, mixing, mastering
Shane Howard – engineering assistanceArtwork and design

Wes Benscoter – album artwork, photo editing
Brian Ames – album layout
Sam Lanthrem – photography
Denise Ryan – photography
Zach Cordner – photography
Travis Ryan – art direction, conceptStudio

Flatline Audio, Westminster, Colorado – production, mixing, mastering

Charts
References
External links
The Anthropocene Extinction at AllMusic
The Anthropocene Extinction at Metal Blade