This is a list of the notation used in Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell's Principia Mathematica (1910–1913).
The second (but not the first) edition of Volume I has a list of notation used at the end.

Glossary
This is a glossary of some of the technical terms in Principia Mathematica that are no longer widely used or whose meaning has changed.

apparent variable
bound variable

atomic proposition
A proposition of the form R(x,y,...) where R is a relation.

Barbara
A mnemonic for a certain syllogism.

class
A subset of the members of some type

codomain
The codomain of a relation R is the class of y such that xRy for some x.

compact
A relation R is called compact if whenever xRz there is a y with xRy and yRz

concordant
A set of real numbers is called concordant if all nonzero members have the same sign

connected
connexity
A relation R is called connected if for any 2 distinct members x, y either xRy or yRx.

continuous
A continuous series is a complete totally ordered set isomorphic to the reals. *275

correlator
bijection

couple
1.  A cardinal couple is a class with exactly two elements
2.  An ordinal couple is an ordered pair (treated in PM as a special sort of relation)

Dedekindian
complete (relation) *214

definiendum
The symbol being defined

definiens
The meaning of something being defined

derivative
A derivative of a subclass of a series is the class of limits of non-empty subclasses

description
A definition of something as the unique object with a given property

descriptive function
A function taking values that need not be truth values, in other words what is not called just a function.

diversity
The inequality relation

domain
The domain of a relation R is the class of x such that xRy for some y.

elementary proposition
A proposition built from atomic propositions using "or" and "not", but with no bound variables

Epimenides
Epimenides was a legendary Cretan philosopher

existent
non-empty

extensional function
A function whose value does not change if one of its arguments is changed to something equivalent.

field
The field of a relation R is the union of its domain and codomain

first-order
A first-order proposition is allowed to have quantification over individuals but not over things of higher type.

function
This often means a propositional function, in other words a function taking values "true" or "false". If it takes other values it is called a "descriptive function". PM allows two functions to be different even if they take the same values on all arguments.

general proposition
A proposition containing quantifiers

generalization
Quantification over some variables

homogeneous
A relation is called homogeneous if all arguments have the same type.

individual
An element of the lowest type under consideration

inductive
Finite, in the sense that a cardinal is inductive if it can be obtained by repeatedly adding 1 to 0. *120

intensional function
A function that is not extensional.

logical
1.  The logical sum of two propositions is their logical disjunction 
2.  The logical product of two propositions is their logical conjunction

matrix
A function with no bound variables. *12

median
A class is called median for a relation if some element of the class lies strictly between any two terms. *271

member
element (of a class)

molecular proposition
A proposition built from two or more atomic propositions using "or" and "not"; in other words an elementary proposition that is not atomic.

null-class
A class containing no members

predicative
A century of scholarly discussion has not reached a definite consensus on exactly what this means, and Principia Mathematica gives several different explanations of it that are not easy to reconcile. See the introduction and *12. *12 says that a predicative function is one with no apparent (bound) variables, in other words a matrix.

primitive proposition
A proposition assumed without proof

progression
A sequence (indexed by natural numbers)

rational
A rational series is an ordered set isomorphic to the rational numbers

real variable
free variable

referent
The term x in xRy

reflexive
infinite in the sense that the class is in one-to-one correspondence with a proper subset of itself (*124)

relation
A propositional function of some variables (usually two). This is similar to the current meaning of "relation".

relative product
The relative product of two relations is their composition

relatum
The term y in xRy

scope
The scope of an expression is the part of a proposition where the expression has some given meaning (chapter III)

Scott
Sir Walter Scott, author of Waverley.

second-order
A second order function is one that may have first-order arguments

section
A section of a total order is a subclass containing all predecessors of its members.

segment
A subclass of a totally ordered set consisting of all the predecessors of the members of some class

selection
A choice function: something that selects one element from each of a collection of classes.

sequent
A sequent of a class α in a totally ordered class is a minimal element of the class of terms coming after all members of α. (*206)

serial relation
A total order on a class

significant
well-defined or meaningful

similar
of the same cardinality

stretch
A convex subclass of an ordered class

stroke
The Sheffer stroke (only used in the second edition of PM)

type
As in type theory. All objects belong to one of a number of disjoint types.

typically
Relating to types; for example, "typically ambiguous" means "of ambiguous type".

unit
A unit class is one that contains exactly one element

universal
A universal class is one containing all members of some type

vector
1.  Essentially an injective function from a class to itself (for example, a vector in a vector space acting on an affine space)
2.  A vector-family is a non-empty commuting family of injective functions from some class to itself (VIB)

Symbols introduced in Principia Mathematica, Volume I
Symbols introduced in Principia Mathematica, Volume II
Symbols introduced in Principia Mathematica, Volume III
See also
Glossary of set theory

Notes
References
Whitehead, Alfred North, and Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, 3 vols, Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1912, and 1913. Second edition, 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927 (Vols. 2, 3).

External links
List of notation in Principia Mathematica at the end of Volume I
"The Notation in Principia Mathematica" by Bernard Linsky.
Principia Mathematica online (University of Michigan Historical Math Collection):
Volume I
Volume II
Volume III
Proposition ✸54.43 in a more modern notation (Metamath)