The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz:
Gottfried Wilhelm (von) Leibniz (1 July 1646 [O.S. 21 June] – 14 November 1716); German polymath, philosopher logician, mathematician. Developed differential and integral calculus at about the same time and independently of Isaac Newton. Leibniz earned his keep as a lawyer, diplomat, librarian, and genealogist for the House of Hanover, and contributed to diverse areas. His impact continues to reverberate, especially his original contributions in logic and binary representations.

Achievements and contributions
Devices
Leibniz calculator

Logic
Alphabet of human thought
Calculus ratiocinator

Mathematics
Calculus
General Leibniz rule
Leibniz formula for π
Leibniz integral rule

Philosophy
Best of all possible worlds
Characteristica universalis
Identity of indiscernibles
Pre-established harmony
Principle of sufficient reason

Physics
Personal life
Leibniz's political views
Leibniz's religious views

Family
Major works by Leibniz
De Arte Combinatoria
Discourse on Metaphysics, (text at wikisource)
Monadology, (text at wikisource)
New Essays on Human Understanding
Nova Methodus pro Maximis et Minimis
Protogaea
Théodicée

Manuscript archives and translations of Leibniz's works
Leibniz Archive (Hannover)  at the Leibniz Research Center - Hannover
Leibniz Archive (Potsdam) at the Brandenburg Academy of Humanities and Sciences
Leibniz Archive (Munster), Leibniz-Forschungsstelle Münster digital edition
Leibniz Archive (Berlin), digital edition
Donald Rutherford's translations at UCSD
Lloyd Strickland's translations at leibniz-translations.com

Journals focused on Leibniz studies
The Leibniz Review
Studia Leibnitiana

Organizations named after Leibniz
Leibniz Association
Leibniz College, affiliated with the University of Tübingen
Leibniz Institute of European History
Leibniz Institute for Polymer Research
Leibniz Society of North America
Leibniz Supercomputing Center, (more details in German version)
Leibniz University Hannover
ZBW – Leibniz Information Centre for Economics
Leibniz Schools in Germany

Prizes named after Leibniz
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize. It is regarded as the highest German award.
Leibniz Ring awarded by the Hannover Press Club.
Berlin Leibniz Medal originally awarded by the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences; currently awarded by the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
Leibniz Medal (Mainz) awarded by the Mainz Academy of Sciences and Literature.

Publications about Leibniz
Maria Rosa Antognazza's 2009 Leibniz biography is a major recent resource.

See also
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz bibliography
German Wikipedia Leibniz page; it contains additional information.

References
External links
Webpage at the Leibniz Association
Webpage at the Mainz Research Alliance
Leibniz Association
Leibniz on Wikisource