Time Cube was a pseudoscientific personal web page founded in 1997 by the self-proclaimed "wisest man on earth," Otis Eugene "Gene" Ray. It was a self-published outlet for Ray's "theory of everything", also called "Time Cube," which polemically claims that all modern sciences are participating in a worldwide conspiracy to teach lies, by omitting his theory's alleged truth that each day actually consists of four days occurring simultaneously. Alongside these statements, Ray described himself as a "godlike being with superior intelligence who has absolute evidence and proof" for his views. Ray asserted repeatedly and variously that the academic world had not taken Time Cube seriously.Ray died on March 18, 2015, at the age of 87. His website domain names expired in August 2015, and Time Cube was last archived by the Wayback Machine on January 12, 2016 (January 10–14).

Content
Style
The Time Cube website contained no home page. It consisted of a number of web pages that contained a single vertical centre-aligned column of body text in various sizes and colors, resulting in extremely long main pages. Finding any particular passage was almost impossible without manually searching.A large amount of self-invented jargon is used throughout: some words and phrases are used frequently but never defined, likely terms materially referring to the weakness of widely propagated ideas that Ray detests throughout the text, and are usually capitalized even when used as adjectives. In one paragraph, he claimed that his own wisdom "so antiquates known knowledge" that a psychiatrist examining his behavior diagnosed him with schizophrenia.Various commentators have asserted that it is futile to analyze the text rationally, interpret meaningful proofs from the text, or test any claims.

Time Cube concept
Ray's personal model of reality, called "Time Cube", states that all of modern physics and education is wrong, and argues that, among many other things, Greenwich Time is a global conspiracy. He uses various graphs (along with pictures of himself) that purport to show how each day is really four separate days—SUN-UP, MID-DAY, SUN-DOWN, and MID-NIGHT (formerly morning, early afternoon, late afternoon, and evening)—occurring simultaneously.The following quotation from the website illustrates the recurring theme:

When the Sun shines upon Earth, 2 – major Time points are created on opposite sides of Earth – known as Midday and Midnight. Where the 2 major Time forces join, synergy creates 2 new minor Time points we recognize as Sunup and Sundown. The 4-equidistant time points can be considered as Time Square imprinted upon the circle of Earth. In a single rotation of the Earth sphere, each Time corner point rotates through the other 3-corner Time points, thus creating 16 corners, 96 hours and 4-simultaneous 24-hour Days within a single rotation of Earth – equated to a Higher Order of Life Time Cube.
Ray offered $1,000 or $10,000 to anyone who could prove his views wrong. Mike Hartwell of The Maine Campus wrote that any attempt to claim the prize would require convincing Ray that his theory was invalid. The proof would need to be framed in terms of his own model, thus deviating from any form of modern science. "Even if you could pull that off," Hartwell said, "Ray is probably broke."

Reception
Ray spoke about Time Cube at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in January 2002 as part of a student-organized extra-curricular event during the independent activities period. He repeated his $10,000 offer for professors to disprove his notions at the event; none attempted it. John C. Dvorak wrote in PC Magazine that "Metasites that track crackpot sites often say this is the number one nutty site." He also characterized the site's content as "endless blather." When asked by Martin Sargent in 2003 how it felt to be an Internet celebrity, Ray stated that it was not a position he wanted, but something he felt he had to do as "no writer or speaker understands the Time Cube." Ray also spoke about Time Cube at the Georgia Institute of Technology in April 2005, in a speech in which he attacked the instruction offered by academics.A 2004 editorial in University of Maine student newspaper The Maine Campus remarked upon what it called the site's "subtle little racist ideologies" which culminate in Ray describing racial integration as "destroying all of the races."In 2005, Brett Hanover made Above God, a short documentary film about Ray and Time Cube. The film was likely named after one of Ray's websites, which criticized the idea that God exists. Hanover's film won awards for Best Documentary at the Indie Memphis Film Festival and the Atlanta Underground Film Festival.

References
External links
Official website archived at the Wayback Machine
Bei Dawei. "'Proving Human Stupidity': Time Cube, Gnosis, and the Challenge of Radical Cosmology" (PDF). Library of Hsuan Chuang University. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 8, 2014. Retrieved March 4, 2015.
Gene Ray interviewed on Tech TV